our second-to-last javasan tax topic of
the entire semester is going to be
access control but before we do that I'm
going to show you here you you're the
secret audience of this particular video
being recorded I'm streaming this and if
you want to watch all the outtakes while
I'm describing the exact process I'm
doing right now it's very meta maybe you
can go check out this vaad which
presumably will be recorded anyway
already back to it so access control the
big idea here is that we want to have a
finer grained control between private
and public so the inspiration we're
gonna have moving forwards just at the
beginning here is thinking about how the
private keyword interacts with the
notion of a package and the notion of a
subclass as an example could a subclass
access say a private member of its
superclass so for example if we had an
array map and then we extend extended
into a special array could that special
array map access the private key
iterator class we've built in the last
lecture ok now if you don't remember
those exactly that's fine but the
question is simply can a class which
extends another can it use the private
members of that original class you might
also ask yourself to do could two
classes in the same package can they use
each other's members right so for
example if we think about guitar string
an array ring buffer from homework one
so I'll just open that up real quick
they're part of the same package that
you're gonna name and then these two
pieces of code here the question is
could a guitar string for example access
the first element or the last a member
of the array ring buffer and it turns
out that in both cases the answer is no
so if you say private you really mean it
you must be part of the same exact class
in order to use that member and so what
we want to do is discuss the other
keywords in Java that have a different
layout than either yes yes yes yes or
yes no no no no so as an example that's
maybe a little less contrived or that we
can see right here on a slide maybe
there's more contrived example let's
consider the my onic array map so the my
onic array map is extends the array map
class it's part of the same exact
package and it
has in this case a constructor which
immediately sets the size equal to s so
if we actually try to compile this from
the command line we will get air size
has private access and array map now
it's kind of interesting is that if we
go look at the array map and we think
about this private size any subclass
actually inherits all of these fields
even though that class cannot access
them so here's an example this is the my
onic array map it extends the array map
class and what I'm gonna do in the
constructor is try and set size equal to
s so in this case the constructor
actually fails to compile because size
has private access now even though this
class cannot access its own instance
variable it nonetheless has that
instance variable which will be able to
see if we run this visualizer
so let's now run okay well that's from
an earlier cut so let's try running this
again and in this case we'll run my own
a quorum at and after we step over this
line and look at this in the visualizer
we see that it actually does have the
keys of values and a size even though
this class cannot access them that's an
important point because otherwise it
wouldn't actually work right and who
didn't have those are those variables it
would be useless so if we want to
actually be able to do that we can use a
new keyword that we have not seen before
in this class at least called protected
and the way that works is we simply go
into our class in this case array map
and I say this is no longer private it
is protected and that is not as private
as private right I mean private means
only for you protected means hey you
know I'm willing to let some of the
world use this but not just anybody and
in particular the Java access control
box or the table looks like this if you
are part of the same class or you're
part of the same package or you're part
of the same subclass you may access this
item and so in this case the my annika
ray map it is able to use this size
field and if we were to rerun this in
fact I don't let's do it so now if we
take this away we'll see it compiles
just fine and if we rerun this thing I
started another one oh boy happy
okay all right sorry a little sloppy
there because we now have multiple
copies of my debugger running but okay
in this case we look at the debugger we
can see that the size is five so we set
the size to five glorious it actually
worked
everybody's happy so that's what
protected does for you it allows other
things in the same package or in the
same of it or or subclasses to use that
field now there's actually a fourth
level of access which is known as
packaged private in this case the way
you get the package private level of
access control level is to put no
keyword at all so in other words I would
go into here let's stop oh they're all
running boy okay close them get out of
here
no don't pen I have everything just
slightly too large so I can't get the X
by default so if we go into a Rhema and
we change this from protected to private
or time to private we change it to
nothing at all this right here is now
packaged private this is that fourth
level of access why did they decide to
make putting nothing at all a special
thing I don't know this is what they
decided to do with Java will live with
it so what that means is that only of
their classes that are part of the same
package or that class itself may access
this member of the class and subclasses
may not again you have to be part of the
package so it's either class or package
so let's consider some little examples
here maybe you'll think along so again
we have now changed a ray map so that
this is packaged private we have the my
annika ray map just exactly like it was
before and now we have a third class
called map helper that simply tries to
print out the size of an array map using
this field name so first question do you
think this will still work maybe you and
I could pause the video and ponder it
again so the way to think about it is to
say this is packaged private so is it
part of the same class no is it part of
the same package yes okay done all right
now we come to this one so in this case
we say all right is it part of the same
class
this work here is a part of the same
class no is a part of the same package
yes
we're done that's it we didn't even
think about whether or not it's part of
the same subclass being part of the same
package was good enough now here's a
random question totally out of nowhere
while I was putting this video together
I discovered something very interesting
which is that IntelliJ actually
generates really nice-looking sin tax
highlighted code the only problem is
that I generally make my slides a dark
color on light as opposed to a light
color on dark so if you are watching the
video please fill out this poll it
should hopefully be active whenever you
check it out
I'll keep that in mind for webcast
viewers in the future and if you come to
the real-life lecture I'll ask the
question again I guess you can vote
twice on both of the polls